# Puerto Rico and its Fight for Statehood
### For decades, the status of Puerto Rico has been in limbo. The commonwealth has been a part of the United States since 1898 as a result of the end of the Spanish American War. It has been more than a century since this decision, but Puerto Ricans neither identify as American or Spanish. 
### Although Puerto Ricans are US citizens from birth, they lack many of the rights and resources that US mainland citizens have. They are dependent on the United States for their food, education, infrastructure investments, and more. However, their status as commonwealth citizens means that they cannot vote in the US elections. Puerto Ricans are passionate about politics of the US and the island, and are known for speaking up for their rights, which is done frequently due to corruption within its government. 
### This map depicts the voting results for their local election in 2020, specifically looking at the results of the plebiscite on statehood. A simple yes or no question was given and resulted in an overall vote in favor of statehood. Because of the island's dependency on the US for many of its resources, it seems logical to become a state and earn the rights of every other US mainland citizen. However, many worry about their identities being challenged through this change. This map explores several of the problems the island is currently facing today and challenges their geographic significance: How could these issues have affected voting patterns across the island?
### [This report](https://www.wlrn.org/2021-03-11/how-puerto-ricans-feel-about-statehood-and-what-becoming-a-state-could-look-like) explains this issue through the eyes of Puerto Ricans and what the future may hold for the island's status.
